---
layout: post
title: TLA+语言
categories: [TLA+]
description: TLA+学习相关
keywords: TLA+, Math, Algorithm language
---

TLA+语言语法

# TLA+语言

[TOC]

### TLA+描述语言
有两种语法：TLA+语言， plusCal语言.
plusCal的描述能力不如TLA+强大，但plusCal更接近编程模式。
plusCal要转换成TLA+之后才能用TLC检查。


PlusCal is an **algorithm language**. An algorithm language is meant for **writing algorithms, not programs**. Algorithms differ from programs in several
ways:
* 算法的操作对象可以是任意数学对象，program只能操作简单对象
   Algorithms perform operations on arbitrary mathematical objects,such as graphs and vector spaces. Programs perform operations on
simple objects such as Booleans and integers; operations on more complex data types must be coded using lower-level operations such as
integer addition and method invocation.
* program描述计算一个结果的方法，algorithm描述一类计算（聚焦？）
  A program describes one method of computing a result; an algorithm may describe a class of possible computations. 
For example, an algorithm might simply require that a certain operation be performed for
all values of i from 1 to N . A program specifies in which order those operations are performed.
* algorithm的执行由一个step的序列组成，复杂度在step的数量上。
   Execution of an algorithm consists of a sequence of steps. An algorithm’s computational complexity is the number of steps it takes to
compute the result; defining a concurrent algorithm requires specifying what constitutes a single (atomic) step. There is no well-defined
notion of a step of a program.

#### 整体项目组织
spec 下有module和model。
module为源码，model用来配置TLC测试他们

##### 源文件格式
```
---- MODULE module_name ----          《---module_name为代码源文件名。  ---- MODULE和====之间的才是代码，其他都忽略，TLC不会分析。
EXTENDS Naturals, TLC                          《--类似其他语言的#include 或import，导入其他module

\*此处放tla+语言代码

(*  --algorithm algorithm_name               《--    --algorithm用于告诉pluscal转换器这是pluscal语言的代码。每个文件只能有一个。name随便起
	\*放pluscal语言代码（pascal或c风格）        《--pluscal代码时放在注释块中的，即(* *)
*)

\* BEGIN TRANSLATION
此处会放pluscal转换后的tla+语言代码
\* END TRANSLATION

\*此处放tla+语言代码

====
```

##### pluscal语言格式
###### pascal风格：
```
(* --algorithm algorithm_name
variables x = 1, y \in {3, 4}, z = {3, 4};
begin
	\* PlusCal code
end algorithm; 
*)
```
###### c风格
```
(* --algorithm transfer 

{
    variables alice_account = 10, bob_account = 10,
        account_total = alice_account + bob_account;

    process(transaction \in 1..2)
        variable money \in 1..20;               《---在process的情况下，money同一时刻就是两个value了，对每个process一个
    { 
    start: 
        if (alice_account >= money) 
        { 
            alice_account := alice_account - money;
            bob_account := bob_account + money;
        };
        print alice_account;
        
    over: 
        assert alice_account >= 0;
    }
}

*)
```


####  reserved words
#### The PlusCal reserved words are：
assert await begin call define do either else elsif
end goto if macro or print procedure process return
skip then variable variables when while with

#### A TLA+ identifier is a record-component that is not one of the following：  TLA+的保留字
ASSUME ASSUMPTION AXIOM CASE CHOOSE CONSTANT
CONSTANTS DOMAIN ELSE ENABLED EXCEPT EXTENDS IF IN
INSTANCE LET LOCAL MODULE OTHER UNION SUBSET THEN
THEOREM UNCHANGED VARIABLE VARIABLES WITH





